speaking up is hard to do
I understood the true meaning of this
phrase exactly one month ago when my
wife and I became new parents and it was
an amazing moment it was exhilarating
and elating but it was also scary and
terrifying and it got particularly
terrifying when we got home from the
hospital and we were unsure whether our
little baby boy was getting enough
nutrients from breastfeeding and we
wanted to call our pediatrician but we
also didn't want to make a bad first
impression or come across as a crazy
neurotic parent so we worried and we
waited when we got to the doctor's
office the next day she immediately gave
him formula because he was pretty
dehydrated now our son is fine now and
her doctor has reassured us we can
always contact her but in that moment I
should have spoken up but I didn't but
sometimes we speak up when we shouldn't
and I learned that over 10 years ago
when I let my twin brother down my twin
brother is a documentary filmmaker and
for one of his first films he got an
offer from a distribution company and he
was excited and he was inclined to
accept the offer but as a negotiations
researcher I insisted he make a
counteroffer and I helped him craft the
perfect one and it was perfect it was
perfectly insulting the company was so
offended
they literally withdrew the offer and my
brother was left with nothing and I've
asked people all over the world about
this dilemma of speaking up when they
can assert themselves when they can push
their interest when they can express an
opinion when they can make an ambitious
ask and the range of stories are varied
in diverse but they also make up a
universal tapestry can I correct my boss
when they make a mistake can I confront
my co-worker who keeps stepping on my
toes
can I challenge my friends insensitive
joke can I tell the person I love the
most my deepest insecurities and through
these experience have come to recognize
that each of us have something called a
range of acceptable behavior
now sometimes were too strong we push
ourselves too much that's what happened
with my brother even making an offer was
outside his range of acceptable behavior
but sometimes were too weak that's what
happened with my wife and I and this
range of acceptable behaviors when we
stay within our range were rewarded and
we step outside that range we get
punished in a variety of ways we get
dismissed or demeaned
or even ostracized or we lose that raise
or that promotion or that deal now the
first thing we need to know is what is
my range but the key thing is our range
isn't fixed it's actually pretty dynamic
it expands and it narrows based on the
concept on the context and there's one
thing that determines that range more
than anything else and that's your power
your power determines your range what is
power power comes in lots of forms in
negotiations it comes in the form of
alternatives so my brother had no
alternatives he lacked power the company
had lots of alternatives they had power
or sometimes as being new to a country
like an immigrant or new to an
organization or new to an experience
like my wife and I as new parents
sometimes it's at work or someone's the
boss since someone's too subordinate
sometimes it's in relationships where
one person is more invested than the
other person and the key thing is is
that when we have lots of power our
range is very wide we have a lot of
leeway in how to behave but when we lack
power our range narrows we have very
little leeway and the problem is is that
when our range narrows that produces
something called the low power double
bind and the low power double bind
happens when if we don't speak up we go
unnoticed but if we do speak up we get
punished now many of you have heard the
phrase the double bind and can
with one thing and that's gender the
gender double bind is women who don't
speak up go unnoticed and women who do
speak up get punished and the key thing
is that women have the same need as men
to speak up but they have barriers to
doing so but what my research has shown
over the last two decades is is that
what looks like a gender difference it's
not really a gender double bind it's
really a low-power double bind and what
looks like a gender difference are
really often just power differences in
disguise oftentimes we see a difference
treating a man and a woman or men and
women and we think biological calls
there's something fundamentally
different about the sexes but in study
after study I found that a better
explanation for many sex differences is
really power and so it's the low power
double bind and the low power double
bind means that we have a narrow range
and we lack power we have a narrow range
and our double bind is very large so we
need to find ways to expand our range
and over the last couple decades my
colleagues and I have found two things
really matter the first you seem peten
seem powerful in your own eyes the
second you seem powerful in the eyes of
others when I feel powerful
I feel confident not fearful I expand my
own range when other people see me as
powerful they grant me a wider range so
we need tools to expand our range of
acceptable behavior now I'm going to
give you a set of tools today now
speaking up is risky but these tools
will lower your risk of speaking up so
the first tool I'm going to give you got
discovered in negotiations and an
important finding on average women make
less ambitious offers and gets worse
outcomes than men at the bargaining
table but Hannah Ellie Bowles and Emily
Amano tool have discovered there's one
situation where women get the same
outcomes as man and are just as
ambitious that's when they have
eight four others and when they have a
Kate for others they discover their own
range and expand it in their own mind
they become more sort of now this is
sometimes called the mama bear effect
like a mama bear defending her cubs when
we advocate for others we can discover
our own voice but sometimes we have to
advocate for ourselves how do we do that
and one of the most important tools we
have to advocate for ourselves is
something called perspective taking and
perspective taking is really simple it's
simply looking at the world through the
eyes of another person and it's one of
the most important tools we have to
expand our range when I take your
perspective and I think about what you
really want you're more likely to give
me what I really want but here's the
problem
perspective taking is hard to do so
let's do a little experiment I want you
all to hold your hand just like this
your finger put it up and I want you to
draw a capital letter e on your forehead
as quickly as possible okay it turns out
that we can draw the C in one of two
ways and this was originally designed as
a test of perspective-taking I'm going
to show you two pictures of some with in
yonder forehead my former student Erica
Hall and you can see over here that's
the correct D I drew the e so it looks
like an e to another person that's the
perspective-taking
e because it looks like an e from
someone else's vantage point but this e
over here is the self-focused e and we
often get so focused and we particularly
get so focused in a crisis I want to
tell you about a particular crisis a man
walks into a bank in Watsonville
California and he says give me $2,000 on
blowing the whole bank up with a bomb
now the bank manager didn't give him the
money she took a step back she took his
perspective and she noticed something
really important he has for a specific
amount of money so she said why did you
ask for $2,000 and he said my friends
can
be evicted unless I get him $2,000
immediately and she said oh you don't
want to rob the bank you want to take
out a loan why'd you come back to my
office and we can have you fill out the
paperwork
now her quick perspective-taking
diffused a volatile situation so we take
someone's perspective it allows us to be
ambitious and assertive but still be
likable here's another way to be
assertive but still be likable and that
is to signal flexibility now imagine
your car salesperson and you want to
sell someone a car you're going to more
likely make the sale if you give them
two options let's say option a $24,000
for this car and a five-year warranty or
option B $23,000 and a 3-year warranty
my research shows that when you give
people a choice among options it lowers
their defenses and they're more likely
to accept your offer and this doesn't
just work with salespeople it works with
parents when my niece was four she
resisted getting dressed and rejected
everything but then my sister-in-law had
a brilliant idea what if I gave my my
daughter a choice this shirt or that
shirt okay that shirt
this pant or that pan okay that pant and
it worked brilliantly she got dressed
quickly and without resistance when I've
asked the question around the world when
people feel comfortable speaking up the
number one answer is when I have social
support in my audience when I have
allies so we want to get allies on our
side how do we do that well one of the
ways is be a mama bear when we advocate
for others we expand our range in our
own eyes and the eyes of others but we
also earn strong allies now another way
that we can earn strong allies
especially in high places is by asking
other people for advice when we ask
others for advice they like us because
we flatter them and we're expressing
humility and this really works to solve
another double bind and that's the self
promotion double bind the self promotion
double bind is that if we don't
ties our accomplishments no one notices
and if we do we're not likable but if
you ask for advice about one of our
accomplishments we are able to be
competent in their eyes but also be
likable and this is so powerful it even
works when you see it coming there been
multiple times in my life where I have
been forewarned that a low power person
has been given the advice to come ask me
for advice and I want to notice three
things about this first I knew they were
going to come ask me for advice too I've
actually done research on these
strategic benefits of asking for advice
and three it still worked
I took their perspective I became more
invested in their calls I became more
committed to them because they asked for
advice now another time we feel more
confident speaking up is when we have
expertise expertise gives us credibility
now when we have high power we already
have credibility we only need good
evidence when we lack power we don't
have the credibility we need excellent
evidence and one of the ways that we can
come across as an expert is by tapping
into our passion I want everyone in the
next few days to go up to a friend of
theirs
and just say to them I want you to
describe a passion of yours to me I've
had people do this all over the world
and I asked them what did you notice
about the other person when they
described their passion and the answers
are always the same their eyes lit up
and got big they smiled a big beaming
smile they used their hands all I had to
duck because their hands were coming at
me they talked quickly and with a little
higher pitch and they leaned in as if
telling me a secret and then I said to
them what happened to you as you
listened to their passion and they said
my eyes lit up I smiled I leaned in when
we tap into our passion we give
ourselves the courage in our own eyes to
speak up but we also get the permission
from others to speak up and tapping into
our passion even works when we come
across as too weak
both men and women get punished at work
when they shed tears but Lizzie wolf has
shown that when we frame our strong
emotions as passion the condemnation of
our crying disappears for both men and
women I want to end with a few words
from my late father that he spoke at my
twin brother's wedding and here's a
picture of us ah my dad was a
psychologist like me but his real love
and his real passion was cinema like my
brother and so he wrote a speech for my
brother's wedding about the roles we
play in the human comedy and he said the
lighter your touch the better you become
at improving and enriching your
performance those who embrace their
roles and work to improve their
performance grow change and expand the
self play it well and your days will be
mostly joyful and when my dad was saying
is that we've all been assigned ranges
and roles in this world but he was also
saying the essence of this talk those
roles and ranges are constantly
expanding and evolving so when a scene
calls for it be a ferocious mama bear
and a humble advice seeker have
excellent evidence and strong allies be
a passionate prospective taker and if
you use those tools and each and every
one of you can use these tools your
expand your range of acceptable behavior
and your days will be mostly joyful
thank you
[Applause]